An introduction to 2 Samuel.
In the original Hebrew canon,
1 and 2 Samuel were one volume.
The prophets Gad and Nathan,
who completed the writing of 1 Samuel,
wrote all of 2 Samuel.
The narrative covers a period
of some 37 years
from 1077 to about 1040 B.C.E.,
when the writing was completed.
Second Samuel begins
shortly after the death of King Saul
and concludes just before the death
of King David.
The book is an intimate and honest account
of David’s life,
as he sought to follow Jehovah
with all his heart.
In chapter 1,
David receives tragic news
—Saul and his son Jonathan
have died in battle.
Deeply grieved,
David composes a dirge
and calls it “The Bow.”
The rest of 2 Samuel
can be divided into two sections.
Chapters 2 to 4
cover David’s kingship over Judah;
chapters 5 to 24
cover his rule over all Israel.
In chapter 2,
David goes to Hebron,
where he is made king
over the tribe of Judah.
Meanwhile, Saul’s army chief, Abner,
makes Saul’s son Ish-bosheth
king over the other tribes.
In chapters 3 and 4, however,
Abner and Ish-bosheth are put to death,
and in the following chapter,
the people make David king over all Israel.
David then captures
the Jebusite stronghold of Zion
and moves his capital there from Hebron.
Zion becomes known also
as the City of David.
In chapter 6,
David has the ark of the covenant
brought to Jerusalem.
In chapter 7,
David tells Nathan that he would like
to build a house,
or temple, for Jehovah.
But God gives this privilege
to a future son of the king.
However, out of love for David,
Jehovah makes a covenant
with him for an everlasting kingdom.
Chapters 8 and 10
tell about David’s victories
over the Amalekites, Moabites,
Philistines, and other enemies.
Chapter 11 brings us to one
of the darkest periods in David’s life.
He commits adultery with Bath-sheba,
she becomes pregnant,
and David has her husband, Uriah,
killed in battle.
In chapter 12,
Nathan, at Jehovah’s direction,
reproves David.
He also says that calamity
will befall David’s house
and that Bath-sheba’s newborn son will die.
Bath-sheba, who is now David’s wife,
becomes pregnant again
and gives birth to Solomon.
In chapters 13 to 18,
the foretold calamities
on David’s house begin.
David’s son Absalom conspires
to usurp the throne,
and David is forced to flee Jerusalem.
In chapter 18,
David’s men defeat Absalom’s
and Joab puts Absalom to death.
Did you know?
Second Samuel powerfully illustrates
the Bible’s honesty.
Even the failings of Israel’s great leaders
are openly exposed.
We also see that truly repentant sinners,
while reaping what they have sown,
can be forgiven.
In chapter 23,
David humbly acknowledges:
“The spirit of Jehovah spoke through me;
his word was on my tongue.”
In chapter 24,
David is incited to register the nation.
This bad act angers Jehovah,
who brings a scourge on the people.
At the prophet Gad’s direction,
David buys the threshing floor
of Araunah the Jebusite,
builds an altar there,
and offers up sacrifices to God.
At Jehovah’s command,
the scourge against Israel is halted.
As you read 2 Samuel,
see how honestly God’s prophets recorded
Israel’s history,
observe how sin can have tragic consequences,
and note God’s promise
to give David a lasting kingdom
—a promise fulfilled in Jesus Christ,
“the Son of David” and King of God’s Kingdom.